[Music]
welcome to topcast episode
51 this is part 1 of chapter 17
unsustainable which i presume will go
for a few episodes
it's one of those chapters that fits the
description that i've heard other people
say that
sentences in this book could be turned
into entire
paragraphs paragraphs could be turned
into chapters and chapters could be
turned into entire books
this certainly could be turned into an
entire book this particular chapter
unsustainable sustainability is a huge
catch cry of the environmental movement
today
it is not only part of the environmental
movement it has now
permeated the culture to such an extent
that
sustainability is regarded as an
important
moral virtue that people hold things
need to be
sustainable we need to be able to
sustain our existence
not only on this planet but in our own
personal lives
things have to be done in a sustainable
way so we're told
this is going to challenge our
understanding of what sustainability
is the different kinds of meanings that
people
seem to intend when they use the word
sustainable
and sometimes these meanings happen to
be at odds with each other
we're going to talk about what's
unsustainable and what really is
sustainable net and we're going to find
that only one thing
can really be sustainable if by what we
want from sustainability
is survival not only for ourselves but
for everything else that we care about
in the universe
along the way we're going to encounter
the consequences
of the static society lifestyle
why we should want to be an open dynamic
society
we're going to talk about optimism again
we're going to bring back
what we've already talked about from the
book previously and then
use it in order to move forward into the
infinite future
along the way we're going to encounter
bronowski
and attenborough and compare these two
great documentary makers
in terms of their underlying philosophy
and what the key difference is between
them
we're going to see that we're in a
pessimistic era now to a large extent
this has always been so but
culturally at the interface between
science
science communication and entertainment
in other words science documentaries
we're going to see that there has been a
recent decline
in the kind of positivity optimism
and value of human flourishing
that used to be part of the way in which
we came to understand
our place in reality and now
unfortunately
it seems as though we are the virus we
are the disease
people are the problem that need to be
solved rather than being the solution
we're going to get to all of that let's
just dive into the book
chapter 17 unsustainable and david
begins
quote easter island in the south pacific
is famous mainly
let's face it only for the large stone
statues that were built there many
centuries ago by the islanders
the purpose of the statues is unknown
but it is thought to be connected with
an ancestor worshiping religion
the first settlers may have arrived on
the island as early as the 5th century
ce they developed a complex stone age
civilization which suddenly collapsed
over a millennium later
by some accounts there was starvation
war and perhaps cannibalism
the population fell to a small fraction
of what it had been
and their culture was lost the
prevailing theory is that the easter
islanders brought disaster upon
themselves
in part by chopping down the forest
which had originally covered most of the
island
they eliminated the most useful species
of tree altogether this is not a wise
thing to do
if you rely on timber for shelter or if
fish form a large part of your diet and
your boats and nets are made of wood
and there were knock-on effects such as
soil erosion precipitating the
destruction of the environment on which
the islanders had depended
some archaeologists dispute this theory
for example
terry hunt has concluded that the
islanders arrived only in the 13th
century
and that their civilization continued to
function throughout the deforestation
which he attributes to rats not tree
filling until it was destroyed by
epidemics
caused by contact with europeans however
i do not want to discuss whether the
prevailing theory is accurate
but only to use it as an example of a
common fallacy
an argument by analogy about issues far
less parochial
pausing there just my brief reflection
immediately notice the key difference
between
a civilization like the ancient
civilization of east ireland
and our civilization today it almost
goes without saying but sometimes these
things because you're swimming in the
aquarium so to speak you don't notice
the water
we're swimming in this civilization we
don't notice the fact that
we are not dependent in the on the
natural environment
in the same way to the same extent
as the easter islanders were there is a
stark difference here
sure in one sense we need natural
resources just as any other civilization
ever has
like the easter islanders however the
easter islanders
almost like almost like animals
other animals are completely subject to
subtle
changes in the natural environment that
they
lacked the knowledge of how to counter
unlike us if the wind starts to blow too
hard
if tonight there's a terrible
thunderstorm which here in sydney that's
predicted to be
i am relatively safe the
natural environment can change quite
markedly outside of my house
and i can barely notice i've got climate
control here
nothing like the easter island has had
the easter islanders didn't have
artificial fertilizer
they were completely subject to whatever
the natural environment provided them
with
their knowledge was not able to
construct things within their
environment
to protect them against the forces of
nature to the same extent that we can
there is a huge quantitative difference
in the amount of knowledge that either
civilization had and of course there's a
qualitative difference
in their approach to knowledge as well
as we're about to find out
our approach to knowledge is this
culture of criticism where we are
continuously improving things
as david's about to illustrate with the
easter islanders
theirs was a civilization where they
were
singularly unable because of the
ideas that they had of improving their
situation
in time before the civilization went
extinct
killing all of them so we are yes
dependent upon the environment for some
natural resources however our
relationship
to those natural resources is such that
if they begin to reduce to the point
where we begin to run out of a
particular resource we can
create the knowledge of how to exploit a
different resource
such that we can continue to survive an
environment which is
continuously running out of resources
this is
unlike the easter islanders where if a
finite resource
begins to run out then they have no
means of replacing that particular
resource
we on the other hand if you know the
classic example if we
begin to run out of wood for burning
we can turn to coal in order to keep
ourselves warm
and in the extreme if we ran out of coal
tomorrow we could turn to uranium
and then we could turn to solar power
and batteries
and you might well wonder if we continue
to tell this story of
our civilization gradually running out
of the resources that we have
we can still imagine a scenario where we
create knowledge
not yet created which would bring into
being
another resource so that we can continue
to survive
because if things get desperate enough
our culture of criticism
will turn its gaze towards that problem
and
attempt to solve it in time this wasn't
even happening in easter island as we
will come to see
but back to the book david writes
easter island is two thousand kilometers
from the nearest habitation
namely pitcairn island where the
bounty's crew took refuge after their
famous mutiny
okay better better just unpack that
little bit there for
especially readers i presume who
might be outside of the united kingdom
australia or
new zealand namely if you're in the
united states perhaps
i don't know how famous the bounty story
is
unless you happen to have seen the movie
or one of the many movies there's been
five movies made of this single event up
to today's date
um and also pick ken island you can
watch all sorts of amazing documentaries
about pitcain island it's a fascinating
place because
well the mutineers from the bounty led
by fletcher christian eventually ended
up on pitcairn island
and their descendants live there through
to today
and although they speak english they
have a slightly different accent
to other people they have a strange
system of governance they have
this little civilization eking out a
living
on this tiny little island very far from
anywhere
in fact there are now that's some of the
you can tune in on youtube you can tune
in
to some of the young inhabitants who who
have youtube channels and they do live
streaming from
pitcon island because it's just a
fascinating place it's so far from
anywhere else that's civilized you know
surrounded by the pacific ocean
and so so so fletcher christian's
descendants are
still there and who did fletcher
christian
mutiny against uh captain bligh or at
that time
lieutenant bly and he's well known in
australia he's well known in australia
because
he was one of the first uh
naval officers sent by sent by the
british
who were sending their convicts as many
americans will know
we began as a convict nation they sent
over all of their prisoners
to new south wales what was then new
south wales the entirety of
mainland australia was known as new
south wales at that time it wasn't until
later
not until the 1900s that all of the
states that which were colonies at that
time
were then divided up into the states and
then federated
into what is now known as australia
anyway
that's beside the point captain bligh
was sent by the british to be one of the
first governors of new south wales
and funnily enough i wouldn't have been
funny for him
this is after the mutiny on the bounty
so after he had
been thrown off his uh rather large
naval ship into a small
life raft basically a small lifeboat
little sailing boat
uh and uh barely survive to make it all
the way home
it's an interesting story to look up as
i say there's been lots of movies made
about it
but when he did get sent back to
australia
i guess as a reward um he was
tasked with trying to clean up uh
what was known as the well the rum
problem
there was a there was an illicit trading
of the alcohol rum
amongst the guards amongst the the the
navy
sailors officers uh marines that were
stationed
here in new south wales in order to keep
control of
the conflicts and keep law in order so
they started
becoming drunkards anyway bly was tasked
with
with with cleaning this up and he failed
he was once again
mutinied he was imprisoned by his own
officers and and soldiers and various
others
um so uh he didn't have a whole lot of
luck
now this is all after by the way after
he had
um accompanied captain james cook who is
uh even more famous than captain blair
here in australia captain cook
was the first englishman to make it
to the eastern coast of australia to to
discover you know first
white person to to come to australia in
so he is our he's our christopher
columbus if you're watching this from
america
captain james cook was our christopher
columbus discovered
in scare quotes australia
um he he was with captain bligh
on his final voyage to hawaii where he
was killed by the
the locals uh so captain blair uh
accompanied cook on his final voyage got
killed
then uh when he was finally giving
command of his own boat
uh namely the bounty they all mutinied
against him and threw him off and he
barely survived that
he was then sent to australia where
captain cook had actually discovered the
place
and the locals then that he was supposed
to be in charge are supposed to be the
governor over
uh mutinied against him once more and he
ended up going back
to england after that he didn't seem to
have
a great stellar career although if you
look into captain blythe's story
there are many sympathetic readings of
the history of captain bligh
and some of those movies out of those
five movies i think i've seen three of
them
some are more sympathetic than others uh
when it comes to captain bly whether or
not he was a kind of a nice guy and a
good leader or a terrible tyrant
history is still trying to decide so
anyway
that's just a diversion on australia
because pitcain island has been
mentioned here and the the bounty
okay let's keep going both islands
namely pit can island and and easter
island david wright's
are far from anywhere even by today's
standards
nevertheless in 1972 jacob bronowski
made his way to east ireland to film
part of his magnificent tv
series the ascent of man now just
pausing there again
jacob bronowski you may recall his name
various people have referred to him over
time for
his great essay about science and values
and david references that you may
remember
all the way back in the reality of
abstractions so i just just want to
remind
uh listeners viewers of the genius of
jacob bernowski who david quoted all the
way back down the reality of
abstractions where david said
for example as philosopher jacob
branowski pointed out
success at making factual scientific
discoveries
entails a commitment to all sorts of
values that are necessary for making
progress
the individual scientist has to value
truth and good explanations
and has to be open to ideas and to
change the scientific community and to
some extent the civilization as a whole
has to value tolerance integrity and
openness of debate
okay so that's what david wrote about
jacob branowski
back in the reality of abstractions and
here he appears again
as a documentary maker and i think if
you
uh read um the moral landscape
or other things that sam harris has said
on this topic he also references
um jacob bronowski in a similar way
talking about how bronowski referred to
a scientist as needing to respect
evidence to value logic
so we need these moral values these
moral values are in a sense
prior to the activity of science
if you try to do science perform an
experiment
create an explanation without caring
about
coherence evidence
truth then what's the point okay you
need to first have a commitment to these
values
so it's not like morality can be
divorced at all
from the activity of science you there
are things that you
that one should do one should have these
values before one
can in fact find out what is the case in
science
back to the book david writes he jacob
branowski
and his film crew traveled by ship all
the way from california
a round trip of some fourteen thousand
kilometers
he was in poor health and the crew had
literally to carry him to the location
for filming
but he persevered because those
distinctive statues
were the perfect setting for him to
deliver the central message of his
series
which is also a theme of this book that
our civilization is unique in history
for its capacity to make progress he
wanted to celebrate its values and
achievements
and to attribute the latter to the
former so
he wanted to celebrate its values and
achievements and attribute the latter
the achievements you want to attribute
all the achievements of civilization
our civilization western civilization
science and great art
politics stable societies to its
values its values of human dignity
and the inherent sacredness of life and
our commitment to truth those sort of
values and david goes on and to contrast
our civilization with the alternative
as epitomized by ancient easter island
the incentive man had been commissioned
by the naturalist david attenborough
then controller of the british
television channel bbc2
a quarter of a century later
attenborough who had by then become the
dorian of natural history filmmaking
led another film crew to easter island
to film another television series
the state of the planet he too chose
those grim
face statues as a backdrop for his
closing scene alas
his message was almost exactly the
opposite of bronowski's
the philosophical difference between
these two great broadcasters
so alike in their infectious sense of
wonder
their clarity of exposition and their
humanity was immediately evident in
their different attitudes towards those
statues
attinbra called them astonishing stone
sculptures
vivid evidence of the technological and
artistic skills of the people who once
lived here
now i wonder whether attenborough was
really all that impressed by the
islander skills
which had been exceeded millennia
earlier in other stone age societies
i expect he was being polite for it his
day regur and our culture
to heap praise upon any achievement of a
primitive society
but bronowski refused to conform to that
convention
he remarked people often ask about
easter island
how did men come here they came here by
accident that is not in question
the question is why could they not get
off and
why he might have added did others not
follow to trade with them
there was a great deal of trade among
polynesians other than easter islanders
or to rob them or to learn from them
because they did not
know how as for the statues being
vivid evidence of artistic skills
bernowski was having none of that either
to him
they were vivid evidence of failure not
success
then david quotes bernowski and
bronowski said
quote the critical question about these
statues is
why were they all made alike you see
them sitting there
like diogenes in their barrels looking
at the sky with empty eye sockets
and watching the sun and the stars go
overhead
without ever trying to understand them
when the dutch discovered this
island on easter sunday in 1722
they said that it had the makings of an
earthly paradise
but it did not an earthly paradise is
not made by this empty repetition
these frozen faces these frozen frames
in a film that is running down
marker civilization which failed to take
the first step
on the ascent of rational knowledge
end quote from the ascent of man 1973
the statues were all made alike because
easter island was a static society
it never took that first step in the
ascent of man the beginning of infinity
of the hundreds of statues on the island
built over the course of several
centuries
fewer than half are at their intended
destinations
the rest including the largest are in
various stages of completion with as
many as 10 percent already in transit on
specially built roads
again there are conflicting explanations
but according to the prevailing theory
it is because there was a large increase
in the rate of statute building
just before it stopped forever in other
words
as disaster learned the islanders
diverted ever more effort
to not addressing the problem for they
did not know how to do that
but into making ever more and bigger
but very rarely better monuments to
their ancestors
and what were those roads made of trees
when bronowski made his documentary
there were as yet no detailed theories
of how the easter island civilization
fell
but unlike edinburgh he was not
interested in that because his whole
purpose in going to easter island was to
point out the profound
difference between our civilization and
civilizations
like the one that built those statues we
are not like them
was his message we have taken the step
that they did not
attenborough's argument rests on the
opposite claim we are like them
and are following headlong in their
footsteps and so he drew an extended
analogy
between the easter island civilization
and ours
feature for feature and danger for
danger
and attenborough said quote a warning of
what the future could hold can be seen
on one of the most remotest places on
earth
when the first polynesian settlers
landed here they found a miniature world
that had ample resources to sustain them
they lived well
end quote from the state of the planet
bbc tv in the year 2000
david continues a miniature world there
in three words is attenborough's reason
for traveling all the way to easter
island
and telling its story he believed that
it holds a warning for the world because
easter island
was itself a miniature world a spaceship
earth that went wrong
it had ample resources to sustain its
population
just as the earth has seemingly ample
resources
to sustain us imagine how amazed malthus
would have been
had he known that the earth's resources
would still be called
ample by pessimists in the year 2000
its inhabitants lived well just as we do
and yet they were doomed
just as we are doomed unless we change
our ways if we do not
here is what the future could hold and
david quotes attenborough again
the old culture that had sustained them
was abandoned
and the statues toppled what had been a
rich fertile world in miniature
had become a barren desert end quote
david writes
again attenborough puts in a good word
for the old culture
it sustained the islanders just as the
ample resources did
until the islanders failed to use them
sustainably
he uses the toppling of the statues to
symbolize the fall of that culture
as if to warn a future disaster for
hours
and he reiterates his world in miniature
analogy
between the society and technology of
ancient easter island
and that of our whole planet today
thus attenborough's easter island is a
variant of spaceship earth
humans are sustained jointly by the rich
fertile biosphere and
the cultural knowledge of a static
society in this context
sustain is an interestingly ambiguous
word it can mean
providing someone with what they need
but it can also mean
preventing things from changing which
can be almost the opposite meaning
for the suppression of change is seldom
what human beings need
pause there my reflection so before we
go much further
into this we have to observe that
this entire vision that attenborough
paints for us
has permeated the culture so deeply
attenborough is rightly known as one of
the greatest documentary makers of all
time
young people especially love him they
love his voice they love his infectious
sense of wonder about the world as david
talked about there
and the cinematography of a lot of his
documentaries is absolutely astounding
you get to see
places that you would otherwise never
get to encounter
he was able to bring that into your
living room into your life and so people
tend to
fall in love with that style and sadly
they also fall in love
to a large extent with the message and
the message now is not only part of
documentary making it's par it's a deep
part of the
world view held by especially
scientists and science-minded people
as much as anyone else there would be
few competitors that could rise to the
heights of attenborough
who have pushed forward this movement
of thinking that we are just
like the easter islanders we are at a
point where the easter islanders were
just prior to their demise we are
consuming the
limited resources on the earth and
everything is about to fall apart any
minute
we are in dire straits the catastrophe
is looming
this is the same old malthusian argument
perhaps they don't need the graphs that
malthus used they just
appeal to your emotions and to your
supposed
common sense that clearly resources on
the planet
must be limited because the planet is of
finite size
this is in complete and utter
contrast to everything that we have
talked about throughout this series and
that david has talked about
in the beginning of infinity and of
course is the complete opposite to what
bronowski
tried to convey in the ascent of man the
difference here
could not be more stark on the one hand
we have this vision
of resources that are finite and people
who deplete them
and will only ever deplete them and on
the other
people who are able to discover
resources and create knowledge
which causes things that otherwise
wouldn't be resources
to be resources and to ensure that those
resources never run out
because resources as a whole are
effectively unlimited because
the universe is effectively unlimited
you can see my
recent podcast cosmological economics
for more on that
and this is a very interesting
distinction that david makes here about
the word sustain and it's worth just
meditating on this for a moment
on the one hand sustain can mean can
mean providing people with what they
need
now what do people need well people
don't just
need the same thing again and again and
again
they need to experience change
development growth knowledge creation
and that to fuel that in their personal
lives
and at the level of a civilization
requires
energy resources and so
we can't possibly be in a situation
where
sustain can mean preventing things from
changing which is also a meaning of
sustain that people use
but we can't sustain in such a way that
things don't change it must be the case
that we have to change
not least because the problems of
tomorrow
are completely unknown to us today we
don't know what's going to happen
tomorrow
the environment itself is going to
change as i like to keep saying
the cosmological event is out there one
day
something is going to happen out of the
clear blue sky
that is completely going to upset us on
a lazy tuesday afternoon
and we will be unprepared for it if we
do not create the knowledge because
regardless of what we do the natural
environment is going to change
now either we can react to it in the
moment or we can
be the kind of people who
prepare for the unknown we can't simply
try to pretend
that problems are not going to happen
because we know that they are inevitable
as david says in many many places in at
many times throughout the book and in
these ted talks and elsewhere
we need to have a stance of problem
solving
if we think we can avoid problems we're
going to be sorely disappointed
we cannot predict what is going to
happen tomorrow
we don't know about all of the unknowns
that are out there
that could cause us problems whether
from the the blue sky
or the blue sea something is going to
happen
for which we are unprepared and the only
thing
that can ensure or that can help ensure
that we do not go the way of the
dinosaur is to
use the one thing that makes us
different our capacity to create
knowledge
and to form models of the rest of
physical reality
and to do that we need fuel we need
resources we need to keep on
changing rapidly we need to make rapid
progress
another way of saying we need change is
just to say we need
good kinds of change improvement
progress
all of this requires fuel it we can't
get this from nothing
we can't just create knowledge without
exploiting the world around us and
shaping the world around us
so that it protects us and nurtures us
to some extent from the
otherwise hostile universe okay and
continuing
david writes the knowledge that
currently sustains human life in
oxfordshire
does so only in the first sense it does
not
make us enact the same traditional way
of life in every generation
in fact it prevents us from doing so for
comparison if your way of life merely
makes you build a new
giant statue you can continue to live
afterwards exactly as you did before
that is sustainable but if your way of
life leads you to invent a more
efficient method of farming
and to cure a disease that has been
killing many children
that is unsustainable the population
grows because children
who would have died survive meanwhile
fewer of them are needed to work in the
fields and so there is no way to
continue
as before you have to live the solution
and to set about solving new problems
that this creates
it is because of this unsustainability
that the island of britain with a far
less hospitable climate than the
subtropical easter island
now hosts a civilization with at least
three times the population density that
easter island had it at zenith
and an enormously high standard of
living appropriately enough
this civilization has knowledge of how
to live well
without the forests that once covered
much of britain
pause there and i'll end the reading
there as well it's
a little short episode but it's a nice
neat way to end it here because
we go into static cultures
more deeply here we take a deep dive
into static cultures
uh we'll do that in the next episode but
again david mentions his home there in
oxfordshire
and has made the point previously that
although
you might think that for example you
know when attenborough goes to easter
island he thinks well
this place is sustaining sustaining the
people that are there the easter
islanders were sustained until
they did something wrong and they were
no longer sustained by the natural
environment we only have to consider
somewhere like oxfordshire
in the winter where it is completely
inhospitable and you wouldn't survive
very long at all
unless you had the technology of a
modern civilization
certainly anyone who lives there now who
didn't have who doesn't have
the the the technology provided by
modern civilization
in terms of insulation in the walls and
perhaps electric heating systems and
ways in which to bring food and water
which isn't
frozen in pipes and so on the
environment the natural environment
there is
not sustaining people at all what's
sustaining people there now
in the sense that attenborough is
talking about the way in which people
can
survive to some extent in fact that's
probably all they were doing on
australia is just barely eking out a
survival
but at least in oxfordshire today not
only are we surviving people surviving
they're also
thriving they're flourishing they
they're creating an open-ended stream of
knowledge creation but they they're only
doing that they're only able to do that
because they are
sustained in this sense by the knowledge
that they've already created and the
technology they already have it's
certainly not the natural environment
the natural environment contributes
something but it's
but it's also it's as much as it's
contributing
resources and oxygen
and and and water it's also contributing
freezing cold temperatures not enough
food in the natural environment uh for
people to survive
water that isn't clean enough to drink
or to make tea with
so there's there's very little sense in
which the natural environment of
oxfordshire is sustaining people and i
might say the same about
even australia which is somewhat more
temperate most of the time
if i was left alone for a month here in
australia with
no access to technology whatsoever on
modern civilization
i'd be very quickly dead in fact i'd
probably only last a few days because
the natural water that happens to exist
around here probably
would kill me and certainly if i went to
the center of australia it's definitely
not going to sustain me i'd have no clue
about how to get water out of the
deserts and
uh much less be able to capture any food
or eat any food
most of the stuff out there is poisonous
so i am only sustained
not by the natural environment at all
but rather by
civilization the civilization that is
around me
that's the thing that is sort of
nurturing me and able to help me to
survive and that's true of
anyone who lives in civilization today
uh
we are beating back the natural
environment
uh which is rather hostile we've eeked
out a resistance
we've eeked out our existence so far so
this is the great positive vision that
we have
of the the the
of civilization uh we do not regard
the natural environment as being this
cuddly thing that sustains us rather it
is just a
source of natural resources which if we
didn't exploit
by creating knowledge about how to use
these natural resources
in new and interesting ways would
quickly kill us
because we we need knowledge of
how to survive in these environments and
absent civilization
almost none of us would have the
knowledge of what it takes
to survive in a natural environment so
it's not that's not what's sustaining us
it's our it's our it's our civilization
coupled with our
own personal explanatory knowledge to a
large extent
about how to use uh the the benefits of
civilization which is exploiting
the natural environment okay that's
where we'll end it for today
uh somewhat shorter episode but
we will continue more with this because
it deserves
unsustainable chapter 17 deserves
special attention i think because here
we are really
we are really deeply coming up against
the culture cultural memes in many many
ways
we're talking about how wonderful
western civilization is but at the same
time we're saying
all the ways in which presently
via the television entertainment
media the intellectual community all the
ways in which these aspects
of western civilization are actually
telling us western culture anyway
are sending us the message that we're
the problem
and so this is what david is trying to
counter here
in this part of the beginning of
infinity and it's an extremely
optimistic way of looking at
people alright until next time bye
[Music]
you